<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Statue of Peter the Great <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Political imprisoned in the Schlüsselburg Fortress. <a href="chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Popular patronymic of Lenin. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From the Russian <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">subota</i>, Saturday. Applied to volunteers offering their labor Saturday after hours. <a href="chapter-17.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Communist students of military academies training officers for the Red Army. <a href="chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On September 25, 1919, an “underground” group of Left Social Revolutionists and Anarchists exploded a bomb in the Leontievsky Pereulok house in which the Moscow Committee of the Communist Party was in session. <a href="chapter-19.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The famous revolutionist who killed General Lukhomsky, the peasant flogger, and who was tortured by the Tsar’s officers and then sent to Siberia for life. Released by the Revolution of 1917, she became the leader of the Left Social Revolutionary wing, gaining a large following, especially among the peasantry. <a href="chapter-19.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Petrograd Fuel Department. <a href="chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>President of the All-Russian Cheka. <a href="chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Popular name for Petrograd. <a href="chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Peasant Bands, called <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">Zelyonniy</i> (green) because of their habitat in forests. According to another version the appellation is derived from the name of one of their leaders. <a href="chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A political prisoner condemned to hard labor. <a href="chapter-22.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fall of Robespiérre⁠—July 27, 1794. <a href="chapter-22.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Old tradition. Yemilian Pugatchev, leader of the great peasant and Cossack uprising under Catherine <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, was executed in 1775. <a href="chapter-25.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father, leader. <a href="chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Took place in the village of Sentovo, Kherson province, July 27, 1919. <a href="chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Der Bund⁠—an organization of Jewish Socialists. <a href="chapter-32.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Astrov later died in prison. <a href="chapter-32.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>General Slastchev-Krinski was later received with special honors into the Red Army and sent by Trotsky to subdue the Karelian peasants (1922). <a href="chapter-33.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Atlanta, Georgia, where the author served two years for anti-militarist propaganda. <a href="chapter-35.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See “Prison Memoirs of an Anarchist,” by Alexander Berkman, Mother Earth Publishing Association, New York, 1912. <a href="chapter-35.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>At the last moment the Cheka refused to release them. <a href="chapter-37.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An exhaustive study of the Kronstadt tragedy, with the documents pertaining to it, will be found in the author’s brochure, “The Kronstadt Rebellion,” published by <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper" xml:lang="de">Der Syndicalist</i>, Berlin, 1922. <a href="chapter-38.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The historic document, suppressed in Russia, is here reproduced in full. <a href="chapter-38.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Popular abbreviation of the “New Economic Policy” reestablishing capitalism. Introduced by the Tenth Congress of Soviets during the Kronstadt days. <a href="chapter-39.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Several months later the entire Moscow Housing Department, comprising several hundred agents and chief commissars, was arrested an charges of graft. <a href="chapter-39.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Not till January, 1922, were the released Taganka Anarchists deported to Germany. <a href="chapter-39.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fanya Baron and Lev Tchorny, Anarchist poet and author, were executed with eight other prisoners by the Moscow Cheka in September, 1921. <a href="chapter-39.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
